.\" strykeall(1) — comprehensive all-in-one man page for stryke
.\" Modeled after zshall(1): every man page in one document.
.\" Render with:  man -l man/strykeall.1
.\" Install:      cp man/strykeall.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
.TH STRYKEALL 1 "June 2026" "stryke 0.16.33" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
strykeall \- the stryke comprehensive reference (invocation, language,
builtins, REPL, AI, web, package manager, parallelism)
.SH OVERVIEW
This is the all-in-one stryke manual, modeled on zsh's
.BR zshall (1).
It concatenates the major sections of the stryke reference into a
single page so you can grep with `/`:
.RS 2
.PP
.B INVOCATION
.RB "\(em " "every CLI flag and subcommand"
.br
.B LEXICAL
.RB "\(em " "tokens, comments, strings, heredocs, regex literals"
.br
.B DATA TYPES
.RB "\(em " "scalars, arrays, hashes, refs, classes, structs, enums, sets, deques, heaps, sketches"
.br
.B OPERATORS
.RB "\(em " "arithmetic, logical, regex, threading (" |> "," ~> "), the slice colon (1:N)"
.br
.B CONTROL FLOW
.RB "\(em " "if/while/for, last/next/redo, match/algebraic match, async/await"
.br
.B SUBROUTINES
.RB "\(em " "sub, fn, signatures, prototypes, closures"
.br
.B TOPICS
.RB "\(em " "$_, _, _0, _1, _N, $_<, $_<<"
.br
.B SCOPES
.RB "\(em " "my/our/local/oursync, package, BEGIN/END/INIT/CHECK, use/require/no"
.br
.B REGEX
.RB "\(em " "three-tier engine, named captures, qr//, tr///"
.br
.B OOP
.RB "\(em " "class, trait, impl, fn Self.x, fields, C3 MRO"
.br
.B AOP
.RB "\(em " "intercepts, proceed, advice"
.br
.B PARALLEL
.RB "\(em " "pmap/pgrep/pfor/psort/preduce, fan, par_pipeline"
.br
.B PIPELINES
.RB "\(em " "|>, pipeline(), par_pipeline_stream, lazy iterators"
.br
.B THREAD MACRO
.RB "\(em " "~>, ~>>, outer-topic chain"
.br
.B REFLECTION
.RB "\(em " "%b %a %all %k %d %c %o %v %pc %e %p"
.br
.B BUILTINS
.RB "\(em " "categorical tour of " 10292 " primaries"
.br
.B REPL
.RB "\(em " "shell-like primitives, history, aliases, prompt"
.br
.B AI
.RB "\(em " "ai, prompt, embed, tool fn, MCP, agent loop"
.br
.B WEB
.RB "\(em " "web_serve, route DSL, ORM, sessions, templates, s_web"
.br
.B PACKAGE MGR
.RB "\(em " "stryke.toml, stryke.lock, ~/.stryke/store, add/remove/install"
.br
.B CLUSTER
.RB "\(em " "pmap_on, agent/controller, remote_wire"
.br
.B SPECIAL VARS
.RB "\(em " "$_, $!, $/, $@, $0, $0, @ARGV, %ENV, $^X"
.br
.B PRAGMAS
.RB "\(em " "strict, warnings, utf8, feature, --compat, --no-interop"
.br
.B ENVIRONMENT
.RB "\(em " "PERL5LIB, STRYKE_RECORD, STRYKE_AI_MODE, …"
.br
.B FILES
.RB "\(em " "~/.cargo/bin/s, ~/.stryke/, stryke.toml, stryke.lock"
.br
.B EXAMPLES
.RB "\(em " "one-liners across every domain"
.br
.B PERFORMANCE
.RB "\(em " "JIT, perfview, flamegraph, --record"
.br
.B DEBUGGING
.RB "\(em " "--disasm, --ast, --explain, -d"
.RE
.PP
For the single-line summary use
.BR stryke (1)
or
.BR s (1).
.SH NAME
stryke, s \- highly parallel Perl 5 interpreter with shell-grade REPL
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B s
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fB--\fR] [\fIPROGRAMFILE\fR] [\fIARGUMENT\fR]...
.br
.B s \fICODE\fR
.RB " (" -e " optional when arg looks like code)"
.br
.B s \fIBUILTIN\fR [\fIARGS\fR]
.RB " (" -e " not needed; calls builtin directly)"
.br
.B s \fISUBCOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B stryke
is a single-binary Perl 5 interpreter written in Rust with parallel
extensions, a Cranelift JIT, pipe-forward (\fB|>\fR), the thread macro
(\fB~>\fR), 10,459 primary builtins in
.BR %b ,
and an interactive REPL that doubles as a Unix shell.
.PP
The interpreter compiles source to a 346-opcode bytecode running on a
register+stack hybrid VM; hot blocks are JIT'd to native code via
Cranelift. Parallel primitives (\fBpmap\fR / \fBpgrep\fR / \fBpfor\fR /
\fBpsort\fR / \fBpreduce\fR) ride on rayon work-stealing across every
available core.
.PP
The binary is invoked as
.B s
by default;
.B stryke
and
.B st
are alternate spellings, all routing to the same entry point.
.PP
.B stryke
is also a coreutils-style command launcher: when called with one
argument matching a known builtin name plus its arguments, stryke
invokes that builtin directly. Example:
.RS 4
.EX
s basename /a/b/c.txt    # prints: c.txt
s sha256 myfile          # prints SHA-256 digest
s len 'hello'            # prints: 5
.EE
.RE
.SH "1.  INVOCATION"
.SS "1.1  Execution"
.TP
\fB'\fR\fICODE\fR\fB'\fR
Inline code; \fB-e\fR is optional when the argument looks like code.
.TP
.B -e \fICODE\fR
Explicit inline; required with \fB-n\fR, \fB-p\fR, \fB-l\fR, \fB-a\fR.
.TP
.B -E \fICODE\fR
Like \fB-e\fR but enables all optional features (Perl 5
.BR feature .pm-style
preloads).
.TP
.IB BUILTIN " [" ARGS "]"
Direct builtin invocation (no \fB-e\fR needed).
.TP
.B --script
Force script lookup when a name conflicts with a builtin
(\fBs --script basename\fR runs \fI./basename\fR).
.TP
.B -c
Check syntax only; parse without compile/run.
.TP
.BR --lint ", " --check
Parse + compile to bytecode without running.
.TP
.BR --disasm ", " --disassemble
Print bytecode disassembly to stderr before VM run.
.TP
.B --ast
Dump parsed AST as JSON and exit (no execution).
.TP
.B --fmt
Pretty-print parsed Perl to stdout and exit.
.TP
.B --explain \fICODE\fR
Print expanded hint for an error code (e.g. \fBE0001\fR) and exit.
.TP
.B --profile
Wall-clock profile to stderr (VM op lines; flamegraph-ready).
.TP
.B --flame
Flamegraph: terminal bars (TTY) or SVG (piped to file).
.TP
.B --no-jit
Disable Cranelift JIT (bytecode interpreter only).
.TP
.B --compat
Perl 5 strict-compat: disable all stryke extensions.
.TP
.B --no-interop
Reject Perl-isms; force idiomatic stryke
(\fB$_0\fR/\fB$_1\fR over \fB$a\fR/\fB$b\fR; \fBfn\fR not \fBsub\fR).
.TP
.B -d\fR[\fBt\fR][\fI:MOD\fR]
Run program under debugger or module \fIDevel::MOD\fR.
.TP
.B -D\fR[\fInumber/letters\fR]
Set debugging flags.
.TP
.B -u
Dump core after parsing program.
.TP
.B --record
Record every run to \fI~/.stryke/perf.sqlite\fR for inspection via
\fBperfview\fR.
.SS "1.2  Input Processing"
.TP
.B -n
Assume \fBwhile (<>) { ... }\fR loop around program.
.TP
.B -p
Like \fB-n\fR but print each \fB$_\fR after the loop body (sed-style).
.TP
.B -a
Autosplit mode (splits \fB$_\fR into \fB@F\fR).
.TP
.B -F\fI/pattern/\fR
\fBsplit()\fR pattern for \fB-a\fR.
.TP
.B -l\fR[\fIoctnum\fR]
Enable line ending processing.
.TP
.B -0\fR[\fIoctal\fR]
Specify record separator (\fB\\0\fR if no arg).
.TP
.B -g
Slurp all input at once (alias for \fB-0777\fR).
.TP
.B -i\fR[\fIextension\fR]
Edit \fB<>\fR files in place; multiple files processed in parallel.
.SS "1.3  Modules & Paths"
.TP
.B -M \fIMODULE\fR
Execute \fBuse \fIMODULE\fR before program.
.TP
.B -m \fIMODULE\fR
Execute \fBuse \fIMODULE\fB ()\fR before program (no import).
.TP
.B -I \fIDIRECTORY\fR
Specify \fB@INC\fR directory (multiple allowed).
.TP
.B -f
Don't do \fI$sitelib/sitecustomize.pl\fR at startup.
.TP
.B -S
Look for programfile using \fB$PATH\fR.
.TP
.B -x\fR[\fIdirectory\fR]
Ignore text before \fB#!perl\fR line.
.SS "1.4  Unicode & Safety"
.TP
.B -C\fR[\fInumber/list\fR]
Enable listed Unicode features.
.TP
.B -t
Tainting warnings.
.TP
.B -T
Tainting checks.
.TP
.B -U
Allow unsafe operations.
.TP
.B -s
Switch parsing for programfile args.
.SS "1.5  Warnings"
.TP
.B -w
Many useful warnings.
.TP
.B -W
All warnings.
.TP
.B -X
No warnings.
.SS "1.6  Info"
.TP
.B -v
Version, patchlevel, license.
.TP
.B -V\fR[\fB:\fIconfigvar\fR]
Configuration summary.
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Help.
.SS "1.7  Parallelism"
.TP
.B -j \fIN\fR
Set rayon pool size to \fIN\fR threads.
.SS "1.8  Subcommands"
.TP
.B docs \fR[\fITOPIC\fR]
TUI hover-doc reader (vi-style nav: j/k/d/u/]/[ /t / / : r ? q).
Aliases:
.BR help ", " h .
.TP
.B repl \fR[\fB--load \fIFILE\fR]
Interactive REPL with optional pre-load.
.TP
.B serve \fR[\fIPORT\fR] [\fISCRIPT\fR]
HTTP server.
.TP
.B fmt \fR[\fB-i\fR] \fIFILE\fR...
Format source files.
.TP
.B bench \fR[\fIFILE|DIR\fR]
Run benchmarks.
.TP
.B init \fR[\fINAME\fR]
Scaffold project in cwd.
.TP
.B new \fINAME\fR
Scaffold project at \fI./NAME/\fR.
.TP
.B install \fR[\fB--offline\fR]
Resolve deps, populate \fIstryke.lock\fR + \fI~/.stryke/store\fR.
.TP
.B add \fINAME\fR[\fB@\fIVER\fR] ...
Add dep to \fIstryke.toml\fR. Flags:
.B --dev \fR/\fR --group=\fIN\fR \fR/\fR --path=\fIDIR\fR \fR/\fR --features=\fIA,B\fR.
.TP
.B remove \fINAME\fR
Drop dep from \fIstryke.toml\fR.
.TP
.B tree
Print resolved dep graph from \fIstryke.lock\fR.
.TP
.B info \fINAME\fR
Show lockfile entry + store path.
.TP
.B pkg \fISUBCOMMAND\fR
Dispatcher for package commands.
.TP
.B build \fISCRIPT\fR \fR[\fB-o \fIOUT\fR]
AOT bundle SCRIPT into a copy of this binary as a standalone exe.
.TP
.B --lsp
Language Server (JSON-RPC on stdio); must be sole arg.
.TP
.B --remote-worker
Persistent cluster worker (stdio); sole arg.
.TP
.B --remote-worker-v1
Legacy one-shot worker (stdio); sole arg.
.TP
.B t \fR[\fIFILE|DIR\fR]
Run tests from \fIt/\fR (test files matching \fItest_*.stk\fR).
Parallel by default; flags \fB--quiet\fR, \fB--summary\fR.
.TP
.B perfview \fR[options]
Read the wall-clock perf log from \fI~/.stryke/perf.sqlite\fR.
Options: \fBtop \fIN\fR, \fBname \fISUB\fR, \fBre \fIREGEX\fR,
\fBpath \fI/abs\fR, \fBsince \fI7d\fR, \fBslowest / fastest / recent\fR.
.SH "2.  LEXICAL STRUCTURE"
.SS "2.1  Comments"
.PP
Line comments start with
.BR # ;
they extend to end of line. No block-comment syntax.
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
# This is a comment
my $x = 1   # trailing
.EE
.RE
.SS "2.2  Identifiers"
.PP
Identifiers match
.B [A-Za-z_][A-Za-z0-9_]*
plus Unicode XID. Package separators:
.B ::
.RB "(e.g. " "Foo::Bar::baz" ).
Sigils:
.BR $  ", " @  ", " %  ", " &  ", " *
for scalars, arrays, hashes, code, and typeglobs.
.SS "2.3  Strings"
.PP
.TP
.B '...'
Single quotes; no interpolation, no escapes except
.B \\'
and
.BR \\\\ .
.TP
.B "..."
Double quotes; full interpolation:
.BR $var ", " @arr ", " "${complex}" ", " "${$ref}" ", " "@{[expr]}" ", " "${\\expr}" .
Escapes:
.BR \\n " \\t \\r \\0 \\xNN \\uNNNN \\\\ \\\""
+ \\e \\a \\f \\b \\v.
.TP
.B q(...)
Like single quotes, with custom delimiter (any matched bracket pair
or non-alphanumeric char).
.TP
.B qq(...)
Like double quotes, with custom delimiter.
.TP
.B qw(LIST)
Word list, whitespace-separated.
.TP
.B qr/PATTERN/
Compiled regex literal.
.TP
.BI <<EOT ... EOT
Heredoc (newline-terminated;
.B <<~EOT
strips leading indentation).
.SS "2.4  Numbers"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
123       # decimal
0x1A      # hex
0b1010    # binary
0o17      # octal (stryke-style)
0755      # octal (Perl-style)
3.14      # float
1.5e-3    # scientific
1_000_000 # underscore-separated
.EE
.RE
.SS "2.5  Regex Literals"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
m/PATTERN/FLAGS   # match (m// is optional with / delimiters)
s/PATTERN/REPL/FLAGS  # substitute
tr/SRC/DST/FLAGS  # transliterate
qr/PATTERN/FLAGS  # compiled regex value
.EE
.RE
Flags:
.B i
(case-insensitive),
.B m
(multiline),
.B s
(dotall),
.B x
(extended),
.B g
(global),
.B e
(eval RHS),
.B r
(return; don't mutate).
.SH "3.  DATA TYPES"
.SS "3.1  Scalars"
.B StrykeValue
is NaN-boxed: immediates (
.BR undef ", "
i32, f64) and Arc-tagged heap objects (BigInt, String, Bytes, Array,
Hash, ArrayRef, HashRef, ScalarRef, CodeRef, Regex, Blessed, IOHandle,
Set, Deque, Heap, sketches: BloomFilter, HllSketch, CmsSketch,
TopKSketch, TDigestSketch, RoaringBitmap, RateLimiter, HashRing,
SimHash, MinHash, IntervalTree, BkTree, Rope).
.SS "3.2  Arrays"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my @arr = (1, 2, 3);
$arr[0]        # element
@arr[1..2]     # slice
@arr[1:2]      # slice with stryke colon range (1:N inclusive)
scalar @arr    # length (Perl convention)
len(@arr)      # length (stryke convention)
push @arr, 4
pop @arr
unshift @arr, 0
shift @arr
.EE
.RE
.SS "3.3  Hashes"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my %h = (a => 1, b => 2);
$h{a}          # element
@h{qw(a b)}    # slice
keys %h
values %h
exists $h{a}
delete $h{a}
%h = ()        # clear
.EE
.RE
.SS "3.4  References"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my $ref = \@arr;       # scalar ref to array
$$ref                  # deref scalar
@$ref                  # deref array
@{$ref}                # explicit
$ref->[0]              # arrow deref array element
$ref->{key}            # arrow deref hash element
&$cref()               # call coderef
$cref->(args)          # call coderef (preferred)
ref($x)                # "ARRAY" / "HASH" / "CODE" / etc.
.EE
.RE
.SS "3.5  Classes (stryke extension)"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
class Point {
    x: Num = 0
    y: Num = 0
    fn distance($other) {
        sqrt(($self->x - $other->x)**2 + ($self->y - $other->y)**2)
    }
    fn Self.origin() { Point() }
}
my $p = Point(x => 3, y => 4)
p $p->distance(Point::origin())   # 5
.EE
.RE
.SS "3.6  Structs (stryke extension)"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
struct Foo { a: Int, b: Str }
my $f = Foo(a => 1, b => "hi")
.EE
.RE
.SS "3.7  Enums (stryke extension)"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
enum Shape {
    Circle(r: Num),
    Square(side: Num),
    Triangle(a: Num, b: Num, c: Num),
}
my $s = Circle(r => 5)
match ($s) {
    Circle($r)    => p "circle r=$r",
    Square($side) => p "square side=$side",
    _             => p "other",
}
.EE
.RE
.SS "3.8  Sets / Deques / Heaps / Sketches"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my $s = set(1, 2, 3, 2, 1)             # uniq
$s->contains(2)                        # 1
$s->union(set(4, 5))

my $dq = deque(1, 2, 3)
$dq->push_front(0); $dq->pop_back

my $h = heap(5, 3, 8, 1)               # min-heap
$h->pop                                # 1
$h->peek                               # 3

my $b = bloom_filter(10_000, 0.001)    # capacity, fpr
bloom_add($b, "alice")
bloom_contains($b, "alice")            # 1

my $hll = hll(14)                      # precision 14 → 16k registers
hll_add($hll, $_) for 1..100_000
hll_count($hll)                        # ~99672, ~0.33% error

my $td = t_digest(100)
td_add($td, $_) for @samples
td_quantile($td, 0.99)                 # 99th percentile

my $rb = roaring(1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13)
rb_and($rb, roaring(2, 4, 6, 8))       # in-place intersect
rb_to_array($rb)                       # (2, 8)
.EE
.RE
.SH "4.  OPERATORS"
.SS "4.1  Arithmetic"
.B + - * / % ** //
(integer division)
.B ++ --
.SS "4.2  Comparison (numeric)"
.B == != < > <= >= <=>
(spaceship)
.SS "4.3  Comparison (string)"
.B eq ne lt gt le ge cmp
.SS "4.4  Logical"
.B && || ! //
.RB "(defined-or), word forms: " "and or not xor" .
.SS "4.5  Bitwise"
.B & | ^ ~ << >>
.SS "4.6  String"
.B .
.RB "(concat), " x " (repeat)."
.SS "4.7  Range"
.B 1..N
(inclusive Perl range),
.B 1:N
(stryke colon range \(em inclusive, supports floats and reverse).
.SS "4.8  Regex"
.B =~ !~
match/no-match.
.SS "4.9  Ternary"
.B COND ? T : F
.SS "4.10  Pipe-Forward (stryke extension)"
.B EXPR |> FN
.RB "passes the LHS as the first argument to " FN .
Compose stages left-to-right:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
@nums |> grep { _ > 0 } |> map { _ * 2 } |> sum
.EE
.RE
.SS "4.11  Thread Macro (stryke extension)"
.B ~> EXPR FN FN ...
threads
.B EXPR
through each
.B FN
sequentially:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
~> "Hello, World!"
    .uc
    .reverse
    .substr(0, 5)
.EE
.RE
.PP
.B ~>>
is the parallel variant (each stage runs in its own task).
.SS "4.12  Topic Slots"
.PP
.TP
.B $_
Perl-compat topic.
.TP
.B _
Stryke topic (same value, unsigiled, only inside blocks/closures).
.TP
.B _0 _1 _2 ...
Positional block parameters (0-indexed). Replaces the
.BR $a "/" $b
magic in sort/reduce.
.TP
.B $_<
.RB "Outer topic in a nested " ~> " chain."
.TP
.B $_<<
.RB "Outer-outer (each " < " climbs one chain level)."
.SS "4.13  Sketch Algebra (stryke extension)"
.PP
Probabilistic data structures are first-class operands for
.BR + " | & ^ - " .
No other language ships this as a syntactic primitive \(em
everywhere else these are library function calls
.RB ( bloom_union(a, b) ", " hll.merge(other) ", " roaring.intersect ).
Operators are functional: a fresh sketch is returned, neither
operand is mutated.
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my $u = $bloom_a + $bloom_b;       # Bloom union (also: |)
my $u = $hll_a   + $hll_b;         # HyperLogLog union (also: |)
my $u = $cms_a   + $cms_b;         # Count-Min counter sum
my $u = $topk_a  + $topk_b;        # SpaceSaving heavy-hitter merge
my $u = $td_a    + $td_b;          # t-digest centroid merge
my $u = $rb_a | $rb_b;             # Roaring union
my $i = $rb_a & $rb_b;             # Roaring intersection
my $x = $rb_a ^ $rb_b;             # Roaring symmetric difference
my $d = $rb_a - $rb_b;             # Roaring andnot (set difference)
.EE
.RE
.PP
Mismatched shapes (e.g. HLL precision mismatch, Bloom capacity
mismatch) fall back to the default numeric/bitwise operator path
\(em no panic, no truncation.
.SH "5.  CONTROL FLOW"
.SS "5.1  Conditionals"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
if (COND)    { ... } elsif (COND) { ... } else { ... }
unless (COND) { ... }                  # equivalent to if (!COND)
EXPR if COND                           # postfix
EXPR unless COND                       # postfix
.EE
.RE
.SS "5.2  Loops"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
while (COND) { ... }
until (COND) { ... }
do { ... } while (COND)
for (INIT; COND; STEP) { ... }
for/foreach my $v (@list) { ... }
EXPR while COND                        # postfix
EXPR for @list                         # postfix
.EE
.RE
.SS "5.3  Loop Control"
.B last
.RB "(break), " next " (continue), " redo " (re-enter without re-test)."
Block labels:
.B LABEL: while ... { last LABEL; }
.SS "5.4  Algebraic Match (stryke extension)"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
match ($val) {
    /^\\d+$/         => p "number: $val",
    [1, 2, _]        => p "array starting 1,2",
    { name => $n }   => p "name is $n",
    Point($x, $y)    => p "point $x,$y",
    _                => p "default",
}
.EE
.RE
.SS "5.5  Try/Catch (stryke extension)"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
try {
    risky_op();
} catch ($err) {
    p "caught: $err"
} finally {
    cleanup()
}
.EE
.RE
.PP
Equivalent Perl 5 form: \fBeval { ... }; if ($@) { ... }\fR.
.SH "6.  SUBROUTINES"
.SS "6.1  sub (Perl-compat)"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
sub greet { my ($name) = @_; "Hello, $name!" }
sub add($a, $b) { $a + $b }            # signatures (Perl 5.20+)
sub circle_area :prototype($) { my $r = shift; PI * $r ** 2 }
.EE
.RE
.SS "6.2  fn (stryke-idiomatic)"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
fn add($a, $b) { $a + $b }
fn add($a: Int, $b: Int) { $a + $b }        # typed signature
fn add($a: Int = 0, $b: Int = 0) { ... }    # defaults
fn Foo::add($a, $b) { ... }                  # qualified
fn Foo.bar { ... }                           # method on package
.EE
.RE
.SS "6.3  Anonymous & Closures"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my $sq = sub { $_[0] ** 2 };
my $sq = fn { _ ** 2 };                  # stryke: _ is topic
my $f = fn ($x) { $x + 1 };
.EE
.RE
.SS "6.4  Async / Await"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my $task = async { expensive_work() };
my $result = await $task;
my @results = await spawn { fetch_url $_ }, @urls;
.EE
.RE
.SS "6.5  Prototypes"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
sub myfn :prototype($\\@$) { ... }       # scalar, array-ref, scalar
.EE
.RE
.SH "7.  SCOPES & PACKAGES"
.SS "7.1  my / our / local / oursync"
.TP
.B my $x
Lexical scope (block-local).
.TP
.B our $x
Package global with lexical alias.
.TP
.B local $x
Dynamic scope (preserved and restored).
.TP
.B oursync $x
Stryke extension: package global with cross-thread synchronized access
(reads acquire shared lock, writes acquire exclusive lock).
.TP
.B mysync $x
Stryke extension: lexical sync — \fBmy\fR scope with cross-thread visibility.
.SS "7.2  package"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
package Foo::Bar;
sub new { bless {}, shift }
1;
.EE
.RE
.SS "7.3  use / require / no"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
use strict;
use warnings;
use feature qw(say signatures);
use Foo::Bar;
use Foo::Bar qw(fn1 fn2);
require "module.pl";
no warnings 'uninitialized';
.EE
.RE
.SS "7.4  Special Blocks"
.B BEGIN { ... }
runs at compile time.
.B END { ... }
runs at exit.
.B INIT { ... }
runs once at start.
.B CHECK { ... }
runs after compile, before run.
.B UNITCHECK { ... }
per-compilation-unit equivalent.
.SH "8.  REGEX"
.PP
Three-tier engine (
.IR regex (1)
crate \(-> fancy-regex \(-> pcre2):
.IP \(bu 2
.B regex
crate handles standard regex with linear-time guarantees.
.IP \(bu 2
.B fancy-regex
adds backrefs, lookarounds, atomic groups.
.IP \(bu 2
.B pcre2
provides PCRE-only verbs (\\K, \\g'name', recursion, named subroutines).
.PP
Stryke picks the lowest tier that handles the pattern.
.SS "8.1  Match"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
"hello" =~ /^h/         # 1
"hello" =~ /(.)(.)/     # captures: $1='h', $2='e'
"abc" =~ /(?<first>.)/  # named: $+{first}='a'
.EE
.RE
.SS "8.2  Substitution"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
$_ = "foo bar";
s/foo/FOO/;             # mutates
my $new = $_ =~ s/o/0/gr;  # non-destructive (r flag)
.EE
.RE
.SS "8.3  Transliteration"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my $s = "Hello";
$s =~ tr/a-z/A-Z/;      # HELLO
my $n = $s =~ tr/L//;   # count L's (returns count)
.EE
.RE
.SS "8.4  Compiled Regex Objects"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my $re = qr/^\\d+$/;
"123" =~ $re            # 1
.EE
.RE
.SH "9.  OOP (Modern stryke `class` syntax)"
.PP
Stryke supports two OOP styles: Perl 5
.B bless
and the modern
.B class
keyword (cleaner, typed, with traits).
.SS "9.1  Class declaration"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
class Animal {
    name: Str
    age: Int = 0
    fn speak { p "Animal $self->name speaks" }
}

class Dog extends Animal {
    breed: Str = "mixed"
    fn speak { p "Woof! I am $self->name" }   # override
    fn bark  { $self->speak() }
}

trait Printable { fn to_str }
class Item impl Printable {
    name: Str
    fn to_str { $self->name }
}

class C extends A, B { }                  # multiple inheritance, C3 MRO
.EE
.RE
.SS "9.2  Construction"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my $dog = Dog(name => "Rex", age => 5, breed => "Lab")
my $dog = Dog("Rex", 5, "Lab")              # positional
.EE
.RE
.SS "9.3  Field access (getter / setter)"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
p $dog->name        # getter (no args)
$dog->age(6)        # setter (one arg)
.EE
.RE
.SS "9.4  Static methods (fn Self.name)"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
class Math {
    fn Self.add($x, $y) { $x + $y }
    fn Self.pi { 3.14159 }
}
p Math::add(3, 4)   # 7
p Math::pi()        # 3.14159
.EE
.RE
.SS "9.5  Introspection"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
$dog->isa("Dog")          # 1
$dog->isa("Animal")       # 1
$dog->fields()            # (name, age, breed)
$dog->to_hash()           # { name=>"Rex", age=>5, breed=>"Lab" }
$dog->with(age => 6)      # functional update (returns new instance)
$dog->clone()             # deep copy
.EE
.RE
.SS "9.6  Visibility"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
class Secret {
    pub  visible: Int = 1
    priv hidden:  Int = 42
    pub fn get_hidden { $self->hidden }
}
.EE
.RE
.SH "10. AOP (Aspect-Oriented Programming)"
.PP
Stryke extends Perl 5 with first-class advice on user subs and methods.
.SS "10.1  Intercept"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
intercept Foo::greet  before { p "calling $_->name" }
intercept Foo::greet  after  { p "called  $_->name" }
intercept Foo::greet  around { p "before"; my $r = proceed(); p "after"; $r }
intercept_list                       # list all intercepts
intercept_remove "Foo::greet"        # drop intercepts on greet
intercept_clear                      # drop all
.EE
.RE
.PP
Advice has access to
.B $_->name
(sub name),
.B $_->args
(call args),
.B proceed()
(call the next layer / original),
.B $_->return_value
(in
.BR after ).
.SH "11. PARALLEL PRIMITIVES"
.PP
Rayon-backed work-stealing across all cores. Two syntactic forms per
primitive: block form and bare-fn form.
.SS "11.1  pmap"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my @out = pmap { _ * 2 } 1..1_000_000
my @hashes = pmap sha256 @blobs, progress => 1

# bare-fn form
my @doubled = pmap dbl, 1..100
fn dbl = _ * 2
.EE
.RE
.SS "11.2  pgrep / pfor / psort / preduce / pmap_reduce"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my @errs = pgrep { /ERROR/ } @log_lines
pfor { print_log _ } @files
my @sorted = psort { length _0 <=> length _1 } @strings
my $sum = preduce { _0 + _1 } 1..1000
my $sum = preduce_init 0, { _0 + _1 } @nums
my $total = pmap_reduce { _ * 2 } { _0 + _1 } @nums
.EE
.RE
.SS "11.3  pcache (parallel memoize)"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my @results = pcache { expensive(_) } @inputs
.EE
.RE
.SS "11.4  fan / fan_cap"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
fan { hit_endpoint(_) }              # _ is index 0..rayon_pool_size-1
fan_cap 100, { compute_one(_) }      # caps at 100, collects results
.EE
.RE
.SS "11.5  par_walk / par_lines / par_sed"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
par_walk "/tmp", { lstat(_)->[7] > 1_000_000 and p _ }
par_lines "huge.log", { /ERROR/ and p _ }
par_sed qr/foo/, "bar", "*.txt"      # in-place across all files
.EE
.RE
.SS "11.6  ppool / pchannel"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my $pool = ppool(4)                  # 4 workers
$pool->submit({ ... }) for @jobs
my @results = $pool->collect()

my ($tx, $rx) = pchannel(64)         # bounded channel
$tx->send($v); my $v = $rx->recv()
.EE
.RE
.SS "11.7  async / spawn / await"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my $t = async { expensive_compute() }
my $r = await $t

my @tasks = map { spawn { fetch_url _ } } @urls
my @bodies = await @tasks
.EE
.RE
.SH "12. PIPELINES"
.SS "12.1  Pipe-Forward (|>)"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
@nums
  |> grep { _ > 0 }
  |> map  { _ * 2 }
  |> sort { _0 <=> _1 }
  |> head 10
  |> sum
.EE
.RE
.SS "12.2  pipeline() — lazy iterator object"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my @out = pipeline(1:1_000_000)
  ->filter { _ % 3 == 0 }
  ->map    { _ ** 2 }
  ->take(5)
  ->collect
# Stages run on demand; no intermediate arrays allocated.
.EE
.RE
.SS "12.3  par_pipeline / par_pipeline_stream"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
par_pipeline(@in)
  ->map { transform _ }
  ->filter { valid _ }
  ->collect

# Streaming with bounded channels between stages:
par_pipeline_stream(
    source  => fn { while (my $l = <STDIN>) { yield $l } },
    stages  => [
        { name => "parse", map => fn { json_decode } },
        { name => "score", map => fn { compute_score } },
    ],
    workers => 4,
)
.EE
.RE
.SH "13. THREAD MACRO (~> / ~>>)"
.PP
Threads a value through a chain of stages, each of which sees the
running value as
.BR _ .
Distinguishes itself from
.B |>
by allowing each stage to be a complex form, not just a callable.
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
~> "hello world"
    chars             # "h", "e", "l", "l", "o", " ", "w", ...
    grep { _ ne " " }
    uniq
    sort
    join ""           # "delhorw"

# Parallel threading:
~>> 1..1_000_000
    map { sha256 _ }
    grep { /^00/ }
    head 10
.EE
.RE
.PP
.B Outer topic chain:
inside a nested
.BR ~> ,
.B _<
refers to the outer chain's running value;
.B _<<
to the chain one level further out, etc. Each
.B <
climbs one nesting level.
.SH "14. REFLECTION HASHES"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
keys %b           # 10,459 primary builtin names → category
keys %a           # 641 aliases (name → primary)
keys %all         # 11,022 = %b ∪ %a ∪ %k
keys %k           # 85 keywords (if, sub, my, our, …)
keys %pc          # 185 Perl 5 core names (subset of %b)
keys %e           # 10,082 stryke extensions (subset of %b)
keys %d           # 4,228 names with LSP hover documentation
keys %c           # 306 categories
keys %p           # 8,790 primaries (after alias dedup)
keys %o           # 70 operators
keys %v           # 97 special variables ($_, $!, $/, ...)
%parameters       # live binding view of every named pad slot

# Per-package stashes:
keys %main::      # everything in package main
keys %Foo::       # everything in package Foo
.EE
.RE
.SH "15. BUILTINS BY CATEGORY"
.PP
This is a navigational overview. For per-builtin documentation, use
the LSP hover (
.B s docs NAME
), the in-REPL `help NAME` alias, or
.IR /usr/local/share/man/man1/stryke.1 .
.SS "15.1  String"
.B length len substr index rindex uc lc ucfirst lcfirst chomp chop
.B chop quotemeta reverse_str sprintf printf format lpad rpad center
.B truncate_str trim trim_left trim_right pad title_case snake_case
.B camel_case kebab_case starts_with ends_with contains words letters
.B punct sentences paragraphs graphemes chars chars_at codepoints
.SS "15.2  Numeric"
.B abs int float ceil floor round sign sqrt exp log log2 log10 pow
.B sin cos tan asin acos atan atan2 sinh cosh tanh
.B isnan isfinite isinf max min sum sum0 prod product mean median
.B mode stddev variance percentile quantile clamp scale normalize
.B random rand_range rand_int gcd lcm fact comb perm
.SS "15.3  Array / Hash"
.B push pop shift unshift splice
.B grep map sort reverse_list
.B uniq distinct flatten zip with_index
.B keys values each first last nth find_index
.B exists defined delete
.B chunk windowed take drop head tail rotate
.B partition group_by chunk_by tally
.B reduce inject scan zipmap
.B intersect difference symmetric_diff_arr
.SS "15.4  Regex"
.B regex_match regex_replace regex_split regex_split_limit
.B captures named_captures match_all
.B quotemeta_regex
.SS "15.5  File / Path"
.B slurp spurt cat read_lines append_file write_json read_json
.B open close read write seek tell truncate
.B file_exists is_file is_dir is_link is_readable is_writable
.B stat lstat fstat mkdir rmdir touch unlink rename copy symlink
.B realpath canonpath basename dirname tempfile tempdir mktemp
.B mktempdir chmod chown
.B files filesf dirs sym_links char_devices executables
.SS "15.6  Process / System"
.B system exec backtick `cmd` fork waitpid wait sleep nanosleep
.B getpid getppid getuid geteuid getgid getegid umask
.B kill signal_name nice renice setpriority getpriority
.B process_list top time uptime_secs uname hostname_str
.B getpwuid getpwnam getgrgid getgrnam
.B chdir getcwd cwd pwd_str chroot
.SS "15.7  Network"
.B fetch_async fetch_val fetch_json fetch_url_tool
.B http_headers http_method_get http_method_post http_method_put
.B http_method_delete http_method_patch http_status_line
.B curl_get curl_post http_fetch http_post
.B web_serve web_route web_render web_redirect web_static
.B ip_parse ip_is_valid ip_to_int int_to_ip
.B cidr_parse cidr_contains ip_in_cidr cidr_difference
.B net_interfaces ifconfig
.SS "15.8  Crypto"
.B md5 sha1 sha256 sha384 sha512 sha3_256 sha3_512 blake2b blake3
.B hmac_sha1 hmac_sha256 hmac_sha512 hkdf_sha256 hkdf_sha512
.B pbkdf2_sha256 pbkdf2_sha512 argon2 bcrypt scrypt
.B aes_encrypt aes_decrypt chacha_encrypt chacha_decrypt
.B ed25519_keygen ed25519_sign ed25519_verify
.B rsa_keygen rsa_sign rsa_verify rsa_encrypt rsa_decrypt
.B base64_encode base64_decode hex_encode hex_decode
.B totp_at totp_now totp_uri uuid_v4 uuid_v7 ulid nanoid
.SS "15.9  Codec / Serialization"
.B to_json from_json to_yaml from_yaml to_toml from_toml
.B to_xml from_xml to_csv from_csv to_html to_markdown
.B msgpack_pack msgpack_unpack
.B native_codec_dumps native_codec_loads
.B encode decode iconv strftime
.SS "15.10 Compression"
.B gzip gzip_compress gzip_decompress
.B brotli_encode brotli_decode
.B zstd zstd_compress zstd_decompress
.B xz xz_compress xz_decompress
.B lz4_compress lz4_decompress
.B tar tar_create tar_extract tar_list
.B zip zip_create zip_extract zip_list
.SS "15.11 Date / Time"
.B time now timestamp date_iso_format date_day date_dayofweek
.B date_dayofyear date_days_in_month date_diff_days date_diff_hours
.B date_diff_minutes date_diff_seconds date_add_days date_add_months
.B date_add_years date_business_days_between iso_week
.B strftime date_now_ms date_now_us date_now_ns
.B human_duration format_duration sleep_ms sleep_us
.SS "15.12 Reflection / Introspection"
.B keys values exists defined ref blessed isa can DOES
.B caller wantarray __FILE__ __LINE__ __PACKAGE__ __SUB__
.B perfview docs help h man lsp_completion_words methods_for which
.B which_all type_name fields to_hash builtins_hash_map
.SS "15.13 Probabilistic Sketches (RFC-1)"
.B bloom_filter bloom_add bloom_contains bloom_len bloom_clear
.B bloom_merge bloom_fpr bloom_bits bloom_serialize bloom_deserialize
.B hll hll_add hll_count hll_merge hll_clear hll_precision
.B hll_serialize hll_deserialize
.B cms cms_add cms_count cms_merge cms_clear
.B topk topk_add topk_heavies topk_count topk_size topk_merge
.B t_digest td_add td_quantile td_count td_min td_max td_sum td_mean
.B td_merge td_clear td_serialize td_deserialize
.B roaring rb_add rb_remove rb_contains rb_or rb_and rb_xor rb_andnot
.B rb_len rb_min rb_max rb_rank rb_to_array rb_serialize rb_deserialize
.SS "15.14 Stateful Sketches (Tier 2)"
.B token_bucket leaky_bucket rl_try_take rl_available
.B hash_ring consistent_hash hr_add hr_remove hr_get hr_nodes
.B simhash sh_add sh_digest sh_similarity
.B minhash mh_add mh_jaccard mh_merge
.B interval_tree it_insert it_query_point it_query_range it_remove
.B bk_tree bk_insert bk_query bk_len
.B rope rope_insert rope_delete rope_substring rope_to_string rope_len
.B myers_diff patience_diff damerau_levenshtein
.SS "15.15 Numerical Stability (Tier 1)"
.B kahan_sum neumaier_sum welford_mean welford_variance welford_stddev
.B welford_pop_variance reservoir_sample
.SS "15.15b rkyv KV Store (Phase 1 local)"
First-class CRUD store with rkyv as the on-disk codec. Zero-copy reads
(\fBmmap\fR + \fBvalidate\fR + \fBcast\fR), atomic rewrite on commit,
versioned format header. World-first: no other scripting language ships
a zero-copy archive KV as a core builtin.
.PP
.B kv_open kv_put kv_set kv_get kv_del kv_remove kv_exists kv_has
.B kv_keys kv_scan kv_len kv_count kv_size kv_commit kv_flush
.B kv_batch kv_close kv_stats kv_info
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my $db = kv_open("/tmp/cache.rkyv");
kv_put($db, "users:alice", { name => "Alice", age => 30 });
kv_put($db, "users:bob",   { name => "Bob",   age => 28 });
kv_commit($db);

for my $row (kv_scan($db, "users:")) {
    my ($key, $val) = @$row;
    say "$key -> $val->{name}";
}
.EE
.RE
.PP
Phase 2 ships
.B stryke kvd
server + remote
.B kv_connect
client \(em the same rkyv archive bytes travel over TCP.
.SS "15.16 Shell-Like REPL (Tier S + A)"
.B clear cls whoami groups pushd popd dir_stack
.B history repl_alias repl_unalias set_alias unset_alias
.B term_size term_width term_height set_title beep ring_bell
.B rm mktemp mktempdir whereis nice renice tree comm column xargs
.B openurl xdg_open curl_get curl_post
.B iconv strftime tac rev_lines tty_raw tty_cooked
.B man manpage run exec_script source src
.SS "15.17 AI / ML / Vectors"
.B ai prompt stream_prompt embed embed_batch ai_cost ai_routing
.B ai_filter ai_map ai_classify ai_sort ai_match ai_dedupe
.B vec_cosine vec_dot vec_normalize vec_add vec_scale vec_search
.B vec_topk cosine_similarity euclidean_distance
.B tool fn ... # declarative AI tool with build-time JSON schema
.B mcp_connect mcp_server mcp_server_start mcp_serve_registered_tools
.SS "15.18 Web Framework"
.B web_serve web_route web_get web_post web_put web_delete web_patch
.B web_static web_render web_redirect web_json web_text web_html
.B web_session web_flash web_cookie web_csrf web_csrf_meta_tag
.B web_security_headers web_form web_multipart web_uuid
.B web_create_table web_add_column web_migrate
.B web_jobs_init web_job_enqueue web_job_dequeue
.B web_sse web_jobs_stats web_rate_limit
.B s_web   # CLI subcommand: scaffold + build a web app
.SS "15.19 Package Manager"
.B s_install s_add s_remove s_update s_outdated s_audit s_vendor
.B s_clean s_tree s_info s_init s_new
.SS "15.20 Cluster / Distributed"
.B cluster pmap_on remote_wire stryke_agent stryke_controller
.B ppool barrier remote_eval remote_spawn
.SS "15.21 Bench / Stress"
.B bench bench_compare bench_section
.B stress_metrics_prometheus stress_metrics_csv stress_metrics_json
.B stress_metrics_export stress_metrics_watch stress_throttled
.B audit_log heat fire
.SH "16. REPL & SHELL-LIKE BEHAVIOR"
.PP
Type
.B s
with no arguments to enter the REPL:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
$ s
 ███████╗████████╗██████╗ ██╗   ██╗██╗  ██╗███████╗
 ██╔════╝╚══██╔══╝██╔══██╗╚██╗ ██╔╝██║ ██╔╝██╔════╝
 (banner with reflection counts)

stryke❯ ls
stryke❯ pwd
stryke❯ pushd /tmp
stryke❯ curl_get("https://api.example.com") |> from_json |> to_table |> p
stryke❯ help pmap         # opens TUI hover-doc reader
stryke❯ man ls            # spawns system man(1)
stryke❯ exit              # Ctrl-D also works
.EE
.RE
.PP
Tab completion is backed by
.IR strykelang/lsp_completion_words.txt
(22,071 names: every primary, alias, keyword, special variable, file
test op, glob qualifier). History is reedline-backed and persists
across sessions.
.PP
.B Pipelines in stryke REPL are in-process.
Each
.B |>
stage is a heap-resident
.B StrykeValue
passed to the next stage's function. No fork, no exec, no syscall
boundary. The REPL is the only programming-language prompt that
provides shell-grade UX
.B and
in-process structured pipelines simultaneously.
.SS "16.1  REPL Aliases"
.PP
Bare
.B alias
is reserved for Perl typeglob assignment
.RB ( "*alias = \\&original" ).
REPL alias table lives under
.B repl_alias / repl_unalias / set_alias / unset_alias :
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
stryke❯ repl_alias("ll", "ls -la")
stryke❯ repl_alias("g=git")           # equals-form
stryke❯ repl_unalias("g")
.EE
.RE
.SH "17. AI PRIMITIVES"
.SS "17.1  ai / prompt / stream_prompt"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my $r = ai "summarize this", $document
my $r = prompt "What is 2+2?", model => "claude-sonnet-4-6"
stream_prompt "explain quantum entanglement", { _ }  # streams chunks
.EE
.RE
.SS "17.2  tool fn (declarative tool)"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
tool fn weather($city: string) "Get the current weather" {
    fetch "https://api.weather.com/" . uri_encode($city)
}
ai "what's the weather in Tokyo?"        # auto-routes to agent loop
.EE
.RE
.SS "17.3  AI collection builtins"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my @keep = ai_filter "is positive sentiment", @comments
my @cats = ai_map    "categorize",            @items
my @class = ai_classify ["bug","feature","question"], @issues
my @sorted = ai_sort "rank by relevance to $query", @docs
my $hit   = ai_match  "find the user-mentioning $name", @rows
.EE
.RE
.SS "17.4  Embeddings + vector search"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my @vecs = embed_batch \@texts             # auto-batched
my $hit  = vec_search $query_vec, \@vecs   # SQLite-vec backed
my @top  = vec_topk 5, $query_vec, \@vecs
.EE
.RE
.SS "17.5  MCP (Model Context Protocol)"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my $mcp = mcp_connect "stdio:./my-mcp-server"
mcp_server "myserver", tools => [\\&weather, \\&search]
mcp_server_start "myserver"
# `s build --mcp-server NAME` builds a self-contained MCP server binary.
.EE
.RE
.SH "18. WEB FRAMEWORK"
.PP
Rails-shaped scaffold;
.IR .stk
source files; framework runtime is
.B web_*
builtins. The whole framework + your app + SQLite ships as a single
.B cargo build --release
binary via
.BR "s_web build" .
.SS "18.1  Generator"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
s_web new myapp \\
    --app everything --theme cyberpunk \\
    --auth --admin --docker --ci --pwa --migrate
.EE
.RE
.SS "18.2  Routing"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
web_route "GET",  "/users",       \\&list_users
web_route "POST", "/users",       \\&create_user
web_route "GET",  "/users/:id",   \\&show_user
web_serve port => 8080
.EE
.RE
.SS "18.3  ORM"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
web_create_table "users", {
    id      => "INTEGER PRIMARY KEY",
    name    => "TEXT NOT NULL",
    email   => "TEXT UNIQUE",
}
my @users = User->all
my $u    = User->find(42)
$u->{name} = "Alice"
$u->save
.EE
.RE
.SS "18.4  Templates"
.PP
ERB-style
.B <%= expr %>
,
.B <% code %>
,
.B <%- code -%>
(trim whitespace), layouts, partials.
.SH "19. PACKAGE MANAGER"
.PP
Cargo-shaped manifest. Reproducible builds via
.B stryke.lock
+ content-addressed
.BR ~/.stryke/store/ .
.SS "19.1  Manifest"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
# stryke.toml
[package]
name = "myproj"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2026"

[dependencies]
stryke-utils = "1.2"
stryke-http  = { version = "0.5", features = ["tls"] }
local-shared = { path = "../shared" }
.EE
.RE
.SS "19.2  Commands"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
s install            # resolve + populate store
s add httprs        # add dep
s remove httprs     # remove dep
s tree              # print resolved graph
s info httprs       # store path + version
s update            # bump pinned versions
s outdated          # diff against latest
s audit             # security scan
s vendor            # copy deps into ./vendor
.EE
.RE
.SH "20. CLUSTER & DISTRIBUTED"
.PP
Built-in distributed compute: spawn workers across many machines,
fan-out work, collect results. Single-binary deployment via
.BR "s build" .
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
my $cluster = cluster(["host1", "host2", "host3"])
my @results = $cluster->pmap_on(sub { sha256(slurp _) }, \@files)
.EE
.RE
.PP
The controller spawns
.B s --remote-worker
on each host via SSH. Wire protocol is custom (
.B remote_wire
), bincode-serialized, length-prefixed. mTLS in roadmap; current
plaintext OK for trusted networks.
.SH "21. SPECIAL VARIABLES"
.PP
.TP
.B $_
Default topic.
.TP
.B @_
Subroutine arguments.
.TP
.B $0
Program name.
.TP
.B $^X
The stryke / perl binary path.
.TP
.B $!
Last system error message (errno).
.TP
.B $@
Last \fBeval\fR error.
.TP
.B $/
Input record separator (default \fB\\n\fR).
.TP
.B $\\
Output record separator.
.TP
.B $,
Output field separator (for \fBprint\fR).
.TP
.B $"
List interpolation separator.
.TP
.B $.
Current line number for last read filehandle.
.TP
.B $1 .. $9
Regex captures.
.TP
.B $+
Last successful regex capture.
.TP
.B %+
Named regex captures.
.TP
.B @+ @-
Capture end / start offsets.
.TP
.B @ARGV
Command-line arguments.
.TP
.B %ENV
Environment variables.
.TP
.B @INC
Module include path.
.TP
.B %INC
Loaded modules.
.TP
.B %SIG
Signal handlers.
.TP
.B $$
Process ID.
.SH "22. PRAGMAS"
.TP
.B use strict;
Strict variable / refs / subs.
.TP
.B use warnings;
Compile-time + runtime warnings.
.TP
.B use utf8;
Source code is UTF-8.
.TP
.B use feature qw(say signatures fc);
Enable Perl 5+ features.
.TP
.B --compat
Disable all stryke extensions (CLI flag).
.TP
.B --no-interop
Enforce idiomatic stryke (CLI flag).
.SH "23. ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
.TP
.B PERL5LIB
Colon-separated dirs prepended to
.BR @INC .
.TP
.B PERL5OPT
Default CLI options.
.TP
.B STRYKE_RECORD
\fB1\fR records runs to \fI~/.stryke/perf.sqlite\fR.
.TP
.B STRYKE_AI_MODE
\fBmock-only\fR forces AI builtins to return mocked responses.
.TP
.B STRYKE_AUDIT_LOG
Path for structured audit JSONL log; default \fI~/.stryke/audit.log\fR.
.TP
.B RAYON_NUM_THREADS
Override the rayon pool size (see also CLI \fB-j N\fR).
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disable colored output / banner.
.TP
.B HOME
Used by \fBcd\fR / \fI~\fR expansion / \fI~/.stryke\fR resolution.
.SH "24. FILES"
.TP
.I ~/.cargo/bin/s
Default install location via \fBcargo install strykelang\fR.
.TP
.I ~/.stryke/store/
Content-addressed dep blobs.
.TP
.I ~/.stryke/perf.sqlite
Per-run wall-clock log (when \fBSTRYKE_RECORD=1\fR or \fB--record\fR).
.TP
.I ~/.stryke/audit.log
Structured JSONL audit log.
.TP
.I ~/.stryke/scripts.db
Bytecode cache (rkyv-backed).
.TP
.I ~/.cache/stryke/
Other transient caches.
.TP
.I ./stryke.toml
Per-project manifest.
.TP
.I ./stryke.lock
Per-project resolver lockfile.
.TP
.I ./lib/
Project library code.
.TP
.I ./t/
Test directory.
.TP
.I /usr/local/share/man/man1/stryke.1
Short man page.
.TP
.I /usr/local/share/man/man1/strykeall.1
This page.
.SH "25. EXAMPLES"
.SS "Inline one-liners"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
# Sum stdin numbers:
seq 1 100 | s -ne '$s += $_; END { p $s }'

# Parallel SHA-256:
s 'glob("**/*.txt") |> pmap { sha256 _ } |> e p'

# Filter JSON from URL:
s 'curl_get("https://api.example.com") |> from_json
   |> grep { _->{active} } |> map { _->{name} } |> e p'

# Parallel grep with progress:
s 'glob("logs/*.log")
   |> pmap { grep /ERROR/, read_lines _ } |> e p, progress => 1'

# Sed-like in-place rewrite, parallel across files:
s -i.bak -pe 's/foo/bar/g' *.txt

# Top 10 longest lines from STDIN:
s -ne 'BEGIN { my @h }
       push @h, [length, $_]; @h = sort { $b->[0] <=> $a->[0] } @h;
       @h = @h[0..9] if @h > 10
       END { p "$_->[0]\\t$_->[1]" for @h }'

# Count distinct values via HyperLogLog from CSV:
s 'my $h = hll(14);
   from_csv(slurp "data.csv") |> e { hll_add($h, $_->{user_id}) };
   p hll_count($h)'

# Build a static binary for distribution:
s build mytool.stk -o ./mytool

# Spin up a web app:
s_web new myapp --auth --admin && cd myapp && s_web build

# Connect to an MCP server:
my $mcp = mcp_connect "stdio:./my-mcp-server"
ai "summarize the data", mcp => $mcp
.EE
.RE
.SS "REPL one-liners"
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
stryke❯ ls
stryke❯ pwd
stryke❯ pushd /tmp
stryke❯ curl_get "https://example.com" |> length
stryke❯ tree(".", 2) |> p
stryke❯ help pmap                   # opens hover-doc TUI
stryke❯ man ls                      # spawns system man(1)
stryke❯ keys %b |> grep { /^cms/ }   # introspect builtins by prefix
stryke❯ history(-5)                  # 5th-from-last input
stryke❯ exit
.EE
.RE
.SH "26. PERFORMANCE"
.PP
.B Hot-path JIT.
Cranelift block-JIT compiles hot loops to native code; deoptimization
back to bytecode VM is a frame-pointer swap. Disable with
.BR --no-jit .
.PP
.B Per-run profiling.
.B --record
or
.B STRYKE_RECORD=1
records every run to
.IR ~/.stryke/perf.sqlite .
View via
.BR perfview :
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
s perfview                          # top 20 slowest
s perfview top 5                    # top 5
s perfview name rosetta             # path substring filter
s perfview since 24h                # last 24 hours
s perfview slowest                  # sort by duration desc (default)
s perfview fastest                  # sort asc
s perfview path /abs/script.stk     # exact-path filter
.EE
.RE
.PP
.B Flamegraph.
.B --flame
prints terminal bar charts (TTY) or SVG (when piped to a file):
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
s --flame myscript.stk > flame.svg
.EE
.RE
.PP
.B Bytecode disassembly.
.B --disasm
prints the compiled program before running.
.PP
.B Release-build tuning.
The release profile uses
.B "lto = \"fat\""
,
.B "codegen-units = 1"
,
.B "panic = \"abort\""
,
.B "strip = true"
to maximize per-builtin density. 44 MB binary for 10,459 primaries
≈ 4.3 KB amortized per builtin.
.SH "27. DEBUGGING"
.PP
.TP
.B --ast
Dump parsed AST as JSON.
.TP
.B --disasm
Print bytecode before running.
.TP
.B --explain \fICODE\fR
Print the expanded hint for an error code (e.g.
.BR E0001 ).
.TP
.B -d
Run under debugger.
.TP
.B -D\fIFLAGS\fR
Set debug flags (Perl-compat letters).
.TP
.B --profile
Wall-clock profile (VM op lines).
.TP
.B --flame
Flamegraph.
.SH "28. PERL 5 COMPATIBILITY"
.PP
Stryke runs unmodified Perl 5 scripts in
.B --compat
mode (no stryke extensions enabled). The compatibility surface
covers:
.IP \(bu 2
All Perl 5 core builtins (
.IR perlfunc (1)).
.IP \(bu 2
Regex (
.B m// s/// tr/// qr//
) with full Perl 5.40 syntax.
.IP \(bu 2
References, complex data structures.
.IP \(bu 2
Bless / OOP via
.BR bless .
.IP \(bu 2
.BR BEGIN ", " END ", " INIT ", " CHECK ", " UNITCHECK ", " DESTROY ", " AUTOLOAD .
.IP \(bu 2
.B Carp::
,
.B Scalar::Util::
,
.B List::Util::
,
.B POSIX::
shipped in
.BR %INC .
.PP
Parity vs Perl is enforced by 20,056
.B parity/cases
test cases that run both interpreters on every CI cycle and assert
byte-identical output.
.PP
Differences from Perl 5:
.IP \(bu 2
Stryke
.B len
is codepoint-counting; Perl
.B length
is byte-counting. Stryke
.B []
slices are codepoint-indexed; Perl is byte-indexed. Pick one
coordinate system per expression.
.IP \(bu 2
Stryke
.B sub
and
.B fn
are interchangeable; idiomatic stryke uses
.BR fn .
.IP \(bu 2
Stryke has its own
.B $_0
/
.B $_1
positional block params (replaces Perl's magic
.B $a
/
.BR $b ).
.SH "29. EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Script error / non-zero exit from program / die uncaught.
.TP
.B 2
CLI argument parse error.
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted by SIGINT.
.TP
.B 137
Killed by SIGKILL.
.TP
.B 139
Segfault.
.SH "30. SIGNALS"
.PP
Signal handlers register via
.BR %SIG :
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
$SIG{INT} = sub { p "caught Ctrl-C"; exit 0 };
$SIG{TERM} = "IGNORE";
$SIG{__DIE__} = sub { ... };
.EE
.RE
.SH "31. BUGS"
.PP
Known parity gaps tracked in
.I docs/BUGS.md
in the source tree. File new reports at:
.RS 2
https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/strykelang/issues
.RE
.PP
Some Perl 5 magic edge cases (
.B tie
on complex structures,
.B AUTOLOAD
inheritance interaction) may diverge; full list:
.B s docs --bugs
.SH "32. SEE ALSO"
.BR stryke (1),
.BR perl (1),
.BR awk (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR rg (1),
.BR zshall (1).
.PP
.B Project home:
.UR https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/strykelang
.UE
.br
.B Full reference (10,176 topics):
.UR https://stryke.menketech.com/reference.html
.UE
.br
.B Engineering report:
.UR https://stryke.menketech.com/report.html
.UE
.br
.B AI primitives spec:
.I docs/AI_PRIMITIVES.md
.br
.B Package registry spec:
.I docs/PACKAGE_REGISTRY.md
.br
.B Web framework spec:
.I docs/WEB_FRAMEWORK.md
.br
.B Stress testing spec:
.I docs/STRESS_TESTING.md
.br
.B Style guide:
.I docs/STYLE_GUIDE.md
.br
.B Roadmap:
.I docs/ROADMAP.md
.SH "33. AUTHOR"
Jacob Menke (MenkeTechnologies).
.PP
.B "There is more than one way to do it \(em in parallel."
.SH "34. LICENSE"
MIT.
