.\" stryke(1) — man page for the stryke / s binary
.\" Render with:  man -l man/stryke.1
.\" Install:      cp man/stryke.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/  (or $MANPATH/man1/)
.TH STRYKE 1 "June 2026" "stryke 0.16.20" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
stryke, s \- highly parallel Perl 5 interpreter with shell-grade REPL
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B s
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fB--\fR] [\fIPROGRAMFILE\fR] [\fIARGUMENT\fR]...
.br
.B s
\fICODE\fR
.br
.B s
.B -e
\fICODE\fR
.br
.B s
.I BUILTIN
[\fIARGS\fR...]
.br
.B s
.I SUBCOMMAND
[\fIARGS\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B stryke
is a single-binary Perl 5 interpreter written in Rust, with parallel
extensions (pmap / pgrep / pfor / psort / preduce), a Cranelift JIT,
pipe-forward (\fB|>\fR) syntax, the thread macro (\fB~>\fR), and a
shell-grade REPL exposing 10,296 builtins as immediately-callable
barewords (no \fBuse\fR / \fBrequire\fR / \fBimport\fR).
.PP
The binary is invoked as \fBs\fR by default; \fBstryke\fR and \fBst\fR
are alternate spellings.
.PP
When called with one argument that looks like code, the
\fB-e\fR is optional (\fBs 'p "hi"'\fR works). When called with a known
builtin name plus arguments, stryke invokes that builtin directly
(\fBs basename /a/b\fR returns \fIb\fR), enabling stryke to be used as
a coreutils-style command launcher.
.SH EXECUTION
.TP
\fB'\fR\fICODE\fR\fB'\fR
Inline code; \fB-e\fR is optional when the argument looks like code.
.TP
.B -e \fICODE\fR
Explicit inline; required with \fB-n\fR, \fB-p\fR, \fB-l\fR, \fB-a\fR.
.TP
.B -E \fICODE\fR
Like \fB-e\fR but enables all optional features.
.TP
.IB BUILTIN " [" ARGS "]"
Call a builtin function directly from the shell. Example:
\fBs len 'hello'\fR, \fBs sha256 myfile\fR.
.TP
.B --script
Force script lookup when name conflicts with a builtin.
.TP
.B -c
Check syntax only; parse without compile/run.
.TP
.BR --lint ", " --check
Parse and compile bytecode without running.
.TP
.BR --disasm ", " --disassemble
Print bytecode disassembly to stderr before VM run.
.TP
.B --ast
Dump parsed AST as JSON and exit (no execution).
.TP
.B --fmt
Pretty-print parsed Perl to stdout and exit.
.TP
.B --explain \fICODE\fR
Print expanded hint for an error code (e.g. \fBE0001\fR) and exit.
.TP
.B --profile
Wall-clock profile to stderr (VM op lines; flamegraph-ready).
.TP
.B --flame
Flamegraph: terminal bars (TTY) or SVG (piped to file).
.TP
.B --no-jit
Disable Cranelift JIT (bytecode interpreter only).
.TP
.B --compat
Perl 5 strict-compat: disable all stryke extensions.
.TP
.B --no-interop
Reject Perl-isms (\fBsub\fR, \fBsay\fR, \fBreverse\fR, \fB$a\fR/\fB$b\fR);
force idiomatic stryke (\fB$_0\fR/\fB$_1\fR).
.TP
.B -d\fR[\fBt\fR][\fI:MOD\fR]
Run program under debugger or module \fIDevel::MOD\fR.
.TP
.B -D\fR[\fInumber/letters\fR]
Set debugging flags.
.TP
.B -u
Dump core after parsing program.
.SH INPUT PROCESSING
.TP
.B -n
Assume \fBwhile (<>) { ... }\fR loop around program.
.TP
.B -p
Like \fB-n\fR but print each \fB$_\fR after the loop body (sed-style).
.TP
.B -a
Autosplit mode (splits \fB$_\fR into \fB@F\fR).
.TP
.B -F\fI/pattern/\fR
\fBsplit()\fR pattern for \fB-a\fR.
.TP
.B -l\fR[\fIoctnum\fR]
Enable line ending processing.
.TP
.B -0\fR[\fIoctal\fR]
Specify record separator (\fB\\0\fR if no arg).
.TP
.B -g
Slurp all input at once (alias for \fB-0777\fR).
.TP
.B -i\fR[\fIextension\fR]
Edit \fB<>\fR files in place; backup if extension supplied; multiple files
processed in parallel.
.SH MODULES & PATHS
.TP
.B -M \fIMODULE\fR
Execute \fBuse \fImodule\fB...\fR before program.
.TP
.B -m \fIMODULE\fR
Execute \fBuse \fImodule\fB ()\fR before program (no import).
.TP
.B -I \fIDIRECTORY\fR
Specify \fB@INC\fR directory (several allowed).
.TP
.B -f
Don't do \fI$sitelib/sitecustomize.pl\fR at startup.
.TP
.B -S
Look for programfile using \fB$PATH\fR.
.TP
.B -x\fR[\fIdirectory\fR]
Ignore text before \fB#!perl\fR line.
.SH UNICODE & SAFETY
.TP
.B -C\fR[\fInumber/list\fR]
Enable listed Unicode features.
.TP
.B -t
Enable tainting warnings.
.TP
.B -T
Enable tainting checks.
.TP
.B -U
Allow unsafe operations.
.TP
.B -s
Enable switch parsing for programfile args.
.SH WARNINGS
.TP
.B -w
Enable many useful warnings.
.TP
.B -W
Enable all warnings.
.TP
.B -X
Disable all warnings.
.SH INFO
.TP
.B -v
Print version, patchlevel and license.
.TP
.B -V\fR[\fB:\fIconfigvar\fR]
Print configuration summary.
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Print help.
.SH PARALLEL EXTENSIONS
.TP
.B -j \fIN\fR
Set number of parallel threads (rayon pool).
.TP
.BR pmap " {BLOCK} @list [, progress => EXPR]"
Parallel map; optional stderr progress bar.
.TP
.BR pmap_chunked " N {BLOCK} @list"
Parallel map in batches of N items per thread.
.TP
.BR pcache " {BLOCK} @list"
Parallel memoize (key = stringified topic).
.TP
.BR par_lines " PATH, CODE [, progress => EXPR]"
mmap + parallel line scan (interpreter).
.TP
.BR par_walk " PATH, CODE"
Parallel recursive dir walk; topic is each path.
.TP
.BR par_sed " PATTERN, REPLACEMENT, FILES..."
Parallel in-place regex replace per file (g flag).
.TP
.BR pipeline " @list ->filter/map/take/collect"
Lazy iterator (runs on collect); chain
.B ->pmap/pgrep/pfor/pmap_chunked/psort/pcache/preduce
like top-level p* functions.
.TP
.BR par_pipeline " @list" \fIsame chain\fR
Filter / map parallel on collect (order kept).
.B par_pipeline(source=>...,stages=>...,workers=>...)
for explicit channel stages.
.TP
.BR async " {BLOCK}"
Run block on a worker thread; returns a task handle.
.TP
.BR spawn " {BLOCK}"
Rust-style alias for \fBasync\fR; join with \fBawait\fR.
.TP
.BR await " EXPR"
Join async task; passes through non-task values.
.TP
.BR pgrep " {BLOCK} @list"
Parallel grep across all cores.
.TP
.BR pfor " {BLOCK} @list"
Parallel foreach.
.TP
.BR psort " {BLOCK} @list"
Parallel sort.
.TP
.BR preduce " {BLOCK} @list"
Parallel tree fold (rayon; associative ops only).
.TP
.BR preduce_init " EXPR, {BLOCK} @list"
Parallel fold with explicit identity.
.TP
.BR pmap_reduce " {MAP} {REDUCE} @list"
Fused parallel map + tree reduce.
.TP
.BR fan " [N] {BLOCK}"
Execute BLOCK N times (default N = rayon pool size).
\fB$_\fR is the index.
.TP
.BR fan_cap " [N] {BLOCK}"
Like \fBfan\fR; returns list of block return values (index order).
.SH SKETCH ALGEBRA
Probabilistic data structures are first-class operands for
.BR + " | & ^ - " .
World-first \(em no other language treats these as syntactic
primitives. Operators are functional; neither operand is mutated.
.TP
.B $bloom_a + $bloom_b
Bloom-filter union (also
.BR | ).
.TP
.B $hll_a + $hll_b
HyperLogLog union (also
.BR | ).
.TP
.B $cms_a + $cms_b
Count-Min Sketch pointwise counter sum.
.TP
.B $topk_a + $topk_b
SpaceSaving heavy-hitter merge.
.TP
.B $td_a + $td_b
t-digest centroid merge.
.TP
.B $rb_a | $rb_b
Roaring union (also
.BR + ).
.TP
.B $rb_a & $rb_b
Roaring intersection.
.TP
.B $rb_a ^ $rb_b
Roaring symmetric difference.
.TP
.B $rb_a - $rb_b
Roaring andnot (set difference).
.PP
Shape mismatch (HLL precision differs, Bloom capacity differs)
falls back to the default numeric/bitwise path \(em no panic, no
silent truncation.
.SH RKYV KV STORE
First-class CRUD store with rkyv as the on-disk and on-wire codec.
World-first \(em no other scripting language ships a zero-copy
archive KV as core builtins. Reads are
.RB mmap " + " validate " + " cast
(same primitive
.B script_cache.rs
already uses for cached bytecode); no parse, no allocate per row.
.TP
.B kv_open(\fIpath\fR)
Open or create a store; returns a handle. Missing file
\(em empty store, no I/O until first commit.
.TP
.BR kv_put "(\fIstore\fR, \fIkey\fR, \fIvalue\fR)"
Write key\(rA value. Returns the previous value or
.BR undef .
.TP
.BR kv_get "(\fIstore\fR, \fIkey\fR)"
Return the value or
.BR undef .
Arrays come back as arrayrefs, hashes as hashrefs.
.TP
.BR kv_del "(\fIstore\fR, \fIkey\fR)"
Delete. Returns 1 if the key existed, 0 otherwise.
.TP
.BR kv_exists "(\fIstore\fR, \fIkey\fR)"
1 / 0.
.TP
.BR kv_keys "(\fIstore\fR [, \fIprefix\fR])"
Sorted keys, optional prefix filter.
.TP
.BR kv_scan "(\fIstore\fR, \fIprefix\fR)"
Array of
.RB [ key ", " value ]
arrayref pairs.
.TP
.BR kv_len "(\fIstore\fR)"
Entry count.
.TP
.BR kv_commit "(\fIstore\fR)"
Atomic rewrite to disk (tmp + rename).
.TP
.BR kv_batch "(\fIstore\fR, [[\fBop\fR, \fIk\fR, \fIv\fR], ...])"
All-or-nothing multi-op; rolls back the in-memory state if any op rejects.
.TP
.BR kv_close "(\fIstore\fR)"
Auto-commits if dirty.
.TP
.BR kv_stats "(\fIstore\fR)"
Hashref of metadata
.RI ( entries ", " commit_count ", " last_commit_secs ", " format_version ", " created_at_secs ", " stryke_version ).
.PP
Storage format is versioned (magic
.B STKV
+
.BR format_version )
so reopening a future store fails fast instead of silently
mis-deserialising. Phase 2 ships
.B stryke kvd
server + remote
.B kv_connect
client over the same archive format.
.SH REPL & SHELL-LIKE BUILTINS
The
.B s
binary doubles as an interactive REPL via reedline:
persistent history, tab completion against the full 22,071-name
corpus, sub-10 ms cold start. Over 80 coreutils-shaped builtins
work as immediately-callable barewords with no fork or exec
(every result is a stryke value, composable with \fB|>\fR pipelines).
.PP
.RS 2
.B Filesystem:
.IR cd ,
.IR pwd ,
.IR ls ,
.IR cat ,
.IR rm ,
.IR mv ,
.IR cp ,
.IR ln ,
.IR mkdir ,
.IR rmdir ,
.IR touch ,
.IR chmod ,
.IR chown ,
.IR realpath ,
.IR basename ,
.IR dirname ,
.IR mktemp ,
.IR mktempdir ,
.IR tree ,
.IR find ,
.IR glob .
.PP
.B Directory stack:
.IR pushd ,
.IR popd ,
.IR dir_stack .
.PP
.B Identity:
.IR whoami ,
.IR groups ,
.IR id ,
.IR hostname ,
.IR getpwuid ,
.IR getpwnam ,
.IR getgrgid ,
.IR getgrnam .
.PP
.B Process:
.IR ps ,
.IR top ,
.IR kill ,
.IR nice ,
.IR renice ,
.IR time ,
.IR sleep ,
.IR wait ,
.IR fork ,
.IR exec .
.PP
.B Text processing:
.IR grep ,
.IR sort ,
.IR uniq ,
.IR wc ,
.IR head ,
.IR tail ,
.IR cut ,
.IR tr ,
.IR tac ,
.IR rev_lines ,
.IR shuf ,
.IR column ,
.IR comm ,
.IR diff ,
.IR myers_diff ,
.IR patience_diff .
.PP
.B Networking:
.IR curl_get ,
.IR curl_post ,
.IR http_fetch ,
.IR http_post ,
.IR fetch_async ,
.IR fetch_json ,
.IR openurl ,
.IR xdg_open .
.PP
.B Archives:
.IR tar ,
.IR zip ,
.IR unzip ,
.IR xz ,
.IR gzip ,
.IR zstd .
.PP
.B Terminal:
.IR clear ,
.IR cls ,
.IR reset ,
.IR beep ,
.IR ring_bell ,
.IR set_title ,
.IR term_size ,
.IR term_width ,
.IR term_height ,
.IR tty_raw ,
.IR tty_cooked .
.PP
.B REPL state:
.IR history ,
.IR repl_alias ,
.IR repl_unalias ,
.IR set_alias ,
.IR unset_alias ,
.IR run ,
.IR source ,
.IR src .
.PP
.B Search:
.IR which ,
.IR whereis ,
.IR type ,
.IR command .
.PP
.B Encoding:
.IR iconv ,
.IR strftime ,
.IR date_iso_format ,
.IR format_bytes ,
.IR format_duration .
.RE
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B docs \fR[\fITOPIC\fR]
Built-in docs (\fBs docs pmap\fR, \fBs docs '|>'\fR).
Drops into a TUI hover-doc reader with vi-style navigation
(\fBj/k\fR next/prev, \fBd/u\fR \[+-]5, \fB]/[\fR chapter, \fBt\fR toc,
\fB/\fR search, \fB:\fIN\fR jump, \fBr\fR random, \fB?\fR help, \fBq\fR quit).
.TP
.B repl \fR[\fB--load \fIFILE\fR]
Interactive REPL with optional pre-load.
.TP
.B serve \fR[\fIPORT\fR] [\fISCRIPT\fR]
HTTP server (\fBs serve\fR, \fBs serve 8080 app.stk\fR).
.TP
.B fmt \fR[\fB-i\fR] \fIFILE\fR...
Format source files (\fBs fmt -i .\fR for in-place recursive).
.TP
.B bench \fR[\fIFILE|DIR\fR]
Run benchmarks from \fIbench/\fR or \fIbenches/\fR.
.TP
.B init \fR[\fINAME\fR]
Scaffold project in cwd: \fIstryke.toml\fR + \fIlib/\fR, \fIt/\fR, \fIbenches/\fR.
.TP
.B new \fINAME\fR
Scaffold a new project at \fI./NAME/\fR.
.TP
.B install \fR[\fB--offline\fR]
Resolve manifest deps; populate \fIstryke.lock\fR and \fI~/.stryke/store\fR.
.TP
.B add \fINAME\fR[\fB@\fIVER\fR] ...
Add a dep to \fIstryke.toml\fR. Flags:
.B --dev \fR/\fR --group=\fIN\fR \fR/\fR --path=\fIDIR\fR \fR/\fR --features=\fIA,B\fR.
.TP
.B remove \fINAME\fR
Drop a dep from \fIstryke.toml\fR; reruns install.
.TP
.B tree
Print resolved dep graph from \fIstryke.lock\fR.
.TP
.B info \fINAME\fR
Show lockfile entry + store path for a dep.
.TP
.B pkg \fISUBCOMMAND\fR
Dispatcher for package commands (init/new/install/add/remove/tree/info).
.TP
.B build \fISCRIPT\fR \fR[\fB-o \fIOUT\fR]
AOT: copy this binary with SCRIPT embedded (standalone exe).
.TP
.B --lsp
Language Server (JSON-RPC on stdio); must be the only argument.
.TP
.B --remote-worker
Persistent cluster worker (stdio); only argument.
.TP
.B --remote-worker-v1
Legacy one-shot worker (stdio); only argument.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PERL5LIB
Colon-separated list of dirs prepended to
.BR @INC .
.TP
.B PERL5OPT
Default command-line options.
.TP
.B STRYKE_RECORD
If set to \fB1\fR, records every run to \fI~/.stryke/perf.sqlite\fR for
later inspection via the \fBperfview\fR builtin.
.TP
.B STRYKE_AI_MODE
\fBmock-only\fR forces AI builtins to return mocked responses (for
tests). Pair with \fBai_mock_install\fR.
.TP
.B STRYKE_AUDIT_LOG
Path for the structured-audit JSONL append-log; default
\fI~/.stryke/audit.log\fR.
.TP
.B HOME
Used by \fBcd\fR (no args) and \fI~/.stryke\fR resolution.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.cargo/bin/s
Default install location via \fBcargo install strykelang\fR.
.TP
.I ~/.stryke/
Per-user state: \fBstore/\fR (dep blobs), \fBperf.sqlite\fR (run log),
\fBaudit.log\fR (JSONL audit), \fBscripts.db\fR (bytecode cache).
.TP
.I ./stryke.toml
Per-project manifest (deps, features, package metadata).
.TP
.I ./stryke.lock
Per-project lockfile (resolved dep graph + content hashes).
.TP
.I ./lib/
Project library code (loaded via \fBuse\fR / \fBrequire\fR).
.TP
.I ./t/
Test suite directory (run via \fBs t\fR).
.TP
.I /usr/local/share/man/man1/stryke.1
This man page.
.SH REFLECTION HASHES
Every name stryke knows is in one of these compile-time-populated
hashes, queryable at the REPL with \fBkeys %\fIHASH\fR:
.PP
.RS 4
.B %b
.RB "\(em " "10,296 primary builtins (callable-only)"
.br
.B %a
.RB "\(em " "641 aliases (name \(-> primary)"
.br
.B %all
.RB "\(em " "11,022 keys: %b + %a + %k"
.br
.B %k
.RB "\(em " "85 keywords (if/while/sub/...)"
.br
.B %pc
.RB "\(em " "185 Perl 5 core names (subset of %b)"
.br
.B %e
.RB "\(em " "10,082 stryke extension names (subset of %b)"
.br
.B %d
.RB "\(em " "4,228 names with LSP hover documentation"
.br
.B %c
.RB "\(em " "306 distinct category strings"
.br
.B %p
.RB "\(em " "8,790 primaries (after alias dedup)"
.br
.B %o
.RB "\(em " "70 operators"
.br
.B %v
.RB "\(em " "97 special variables ($_, $!, @ARGV, %ENV, ...)"
.br
.B %parameters
.RB "\(em " "live binding view (every named pad slot)"
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
One-liner sum from stdin:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
seq 1 100 | s -ne '$s += $_; END { p $s }'
.EE
.RE
.PP
Parallel SHA-256 of 10000 files:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
s 'glob("**/*.txt") |> pmap { sha256 _ } |> e p'
.EE
.RE
.PP
Inline call to a builtin as a CLI tool (no script needed):
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
s basename /a/b/c.txt    # prints: c.txt
s sha256 myfile          # prints SHA-256 digest
s len 'hello'            # prints: 5
.EE
.RE
.PP
Format JSON from a URL:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
s 'curl_get("https://api.example.com/data") |> from_json |> to_table |> p'
.EE
.RE
.PP
Parallel grep with progress bar:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
s 'glob("logs/*.log") |> pmap { grep /ERROR/, read_lines _ } |> e p, progress => 1'
.EE
.RE
.PP
Scaffold a new project + add a dep:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
s new myproj && cd myproj
s add stryke-utils
.EE
.RE
.PP
Build a standalone binary that bundles a script:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
s build mytool.stk -o ./mytool
./mytool                 # runs without stryke installed
.EE
.RE
.PP
Drop into the REPL with a project pre-loaded:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
s repl --load ./lib/utils.stk
.EE
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Script error or non-zero exit from program.
.TP
.B 2
CLI argument error.
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted by SIGINT.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR perl (1),
.BR awk (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR rg (1).
.PP
.B Project home:
https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/strykelang
.br
.B Full reference:
\fIhttps://stryke.menketech.com/reference.html\fR (10,176 topics)
.br
.B Engineering report:
\fIhttps://stryke.menketech.com/report.html\fR
.SH AUTHOR
Jacob Menke (MenkeTechnologies)
.PP
.B "There is more than one way to do it \(em in parallel."
.SH LICENSE
MIT.
